She was abused and often felt afraid. Her family couldn’t afford school, so she dropped out and left their Guatemalan village to work as a maid and send money home to buy food for her younger siblings, keeping just enough to treat herself to occasional candy. After all, she was only 12. 

But over the past decade, Enni Ramirez walked across a desert, learned a new language, earned top grades at her new school and volunteered her nursing skills for hospice care in her new community. Now she is just a few college classes shy of becoming an X-ray technician. 

Her path to safety got a boost from a place she never expected. Lawyers who work at Microsoft volunteered as her legal representatives for five years, shepherding Ramirez through the U.S. immigration system so she could obtain a green card and a new, promising life. She’s one of more than 200 people helped each year through the tech company’s Pro Bono program, which encourages employees to volunteer their time to provide free legal assistance to people in challenging situations, from kids fleeing violence to domestic abuse victims to veterans trying to access benefits. 

“I’ve been through a lot,” Ramirez says. “I got very lucky. I don’t think I would have had my papers if I didn’t have a lawyer. They really make big changes in people’s lives.” 

To gain Special Immigrant Juvenile Status and become a lawful permanent resident, Ramirez had to establish that she had been abused, abandoned or neglected by a parent. It’s a formidable, complex process that can take years for all the filings and hearings to be completed. Yet every year, 150,000 unaccompanied children — even babies — are thrust before U.S. judges on their own, often after traumatic escapes from violence, and asked questions through a language interpreter about complicated matters. 

Their reality moved Microsoft Vice Chair and President Brad Smith to team up with actress and human rights activist Angelina Jolie in 2008 to found Kids in Need of Defense (KIND). Immigration judges are more than 100 times more likely to rule in favor of unaccompanied children when they’re represented in court by lawyers, according to a September 2021 Congressional Research Service report. By working with attorneys from law firms and corporations who offer their services on a pro bono basis, KIND has helped more than 30,000 kids who have found themselves in a foreign country without a parent or guardian. salamfilesalalm2